we begin with some breaking news Hamas
says its political leader Ismael Hanah
has been assassinated in tahan Iran's
revolutionary guard has confirmed the
death saying hania and his bodyguard
were killed in an attack on his
residents in the Iranian Capital so far
there has been no claim of
responsibility however Israel has in the
past vowed to kill Hanah and other
leaders of Hamas after the group carried
out the October 7th Terror attacks
and joining me in the studio we have DW
Middle East analyst Shani rosanes Shani
Hamas is calling this a assassination
attempt can you tell us what we know
about the circumstances around it so far
yes well hania was in tran along with
other people um leaders of hasbalah and
other leaders of uh groups connected to
Iran and supported by Iran for the
inauguration of the new president that
took place yesterday shows you how
comfortable and and safe they all feel
there uh he was targeted apparently by a
shot from a a outside of Tran maybe also
a drone that it was connected to it's
unclear exactly the details but very
clear that it was an an attempt for a
very precise hit and it did hit hania
while sleeping with his as you mentioned
a bodyguard in his room uh and it's
confirmed also by the Iran revolutionary
guards this is the case this is pretty
remarkable if if this is confirmed to be
Israel what does it tell you about what
kind of message they are trying to send
with this attack well first of all it's
not going to be confirmed Israel is
never going to take take responsibility
for it this is Israel's mod sity they
never do take uh responsibility though
we know they have acted underground
mostly un targeting officials in the
Iranian nuclear program in the past but
um you know trying to make this
statement by you know assassinating a
leader of Hamas on uh Iranian soil in
the heart of the uh Iranian Capital
that's of course a message that Israel
is trying to send very out loud saying
no matter who you are no matter where
you are we're going to get you sh with
us I'd like to take a closer look now at
the Hamas leader and see if we can look
more closely at the life of isma
Hanah Ismael hania was pictured
alongside Iran's new president just
hours before being assassinated the
62-year-old had been in tran for the
inauguration ceremony hania left Gaza
several years ago and ran hamas's
activities from qat where he lived in
Exile he was born in a refugee camp near
Gaza City in
1962 and joined Hamas in the late
1980s hania Rose through the ranks and
went on to become the prime minister of
the Palestinian Authority in
2006 Hamas named him the group's leader
in
2017 even after leaving the Gaza Strip
he acted as the group's political
Chief Hamas is deemed to be a terrorist
organization by the EU us and numerous
other
countries in April Israeli a strikes in
Gaza killed three of hania's sons and
four of his grandchildren according to
Hamas at the time hania insisted their
deaths would not affect ongoing
ceasefire and hostage
talks despite Han's strong stance some
diplomats regarded him as being more
moderate than other hard line members of
the group his successor on the ground in
Gaza Yahya sinoa is is deemed to be the
person who orchestrated the October 7
Terror attacks on Israel it's not known
what involvement hania had in organizing
the attacks however Israel held him
responsible and included him in a list
of potential
targets Shany tell us a little bit more
about hania what was his role within
Hamas and can you just spell out for us
a little bit what the organization looks
like and exactly where he fit in well
first of all um Hamas was found in 1987
by a a milit a a she a a a religious
figure name known Ahmed Yassin he's
still a very much beloved character
among Palestinians and in the Arab world
and hania grew up in the same Village
and was sort of his part J he was his
helper he was very much connected to the
founding father of Hamas and that's why
we see Hanah as a figure that is quite
known uh despite his actual uh strength
or influence de facto on the daily
operations of Hamas and this is exactly
where we lead it leads it to
understanding of the Kamas Network how
it works it's not much of a you know the
hierarchy in Kamas is not a simple one
as we would imagine in a western
organized you know uh unit it's it's
very much it has two different main
branches one of them dealing more with
the military aspect also on the ground
in Gaza this is where we see sinir which
we know he is The Mastermind behind
October 7th and then there's the
political Branch where we see hania was
kind of uh kicked out of the strip
because of his rivalry with uh senoir
who is the leader of the military branch
and he was dealing more with
negotiations with diplomatic ties he was
very much the guy of Hamas in Iran he
was very much in charge of the
connections with the Iranian regime um
so when we talk about also connection to
October 7th what happened there there's
still uncertainty of how much did he
know how much did he orchestrate in this
specific operation but there's no doubt
that he was very instrumental to the
Kamas organization as a whole for the
you know uh fundraising mechanism and
other you know uh the support that get
from Iran and so forth so looking at
hania as somewhat of the face of
diplomacy for Hamas when you look at
efforts to bring to an end the war in
Gaza um what do you think his death will
mean for efforts at a ceasefire well I I
I think this this deal is dead in the
water and I don't know if Israel
operated on the grounds that they
already assumed this deal would not be
come to frish or is it you know a result
that they were willing to take into
account because it was more important
for Israel to show this achievement of
being being able to reach Hanah to use
this very rare opportunity because hania
is traveling a lot but usually he's
situated in Qatar you know katar's role
as a mediator in uh in the talks is such
that Israel cannot really operate on
Qatari ground these days so uh there was
an opportunity and Israel seized it but
it's clear that you know it brings you
know any talks about a deal for now to
any to a hold you know Hamas will not
going to show any willingness to
negotiate with Israel to show weakness
to show any compromise but we also need
to see it that the leadership of Hamas
and Gaza is becoming more and more
isolated through Israeli assassinations
attempts in the last month we've seen
now hania before that we've seen lri
we've seen other people that are leaders
high ranking in the organization um and
um it's hard to predict if it makes uh
senoir the leader in Gaza more adamant
in sticking to his you know to the war
which will hit 300 days tomorrow or is
it as what netan hope is going to break
him to finally uh you know make more
concessions sh I find it really
interesting um you've said that he must
have felt hania must have felt
comfortable and safe even being in Iran
for this presidential inauguration are
are you surprised that he was there in
the first place given what we now know
that he then likely became had several
visits to Iran and we know he had very
strong ties with them I think the
Assumption for Iran and for many other
you know we have also seen kbal leaders
yesterday in in Iran the Assumption was
after um April 14th this is when uh Iran
Iran launched a direct ATT attack on
Israel um they felt like Iran has sent a
message kind of a red line was crossed
we were talking back then because it was
the first time that after many years of
Shadow War you know through Proxes and
so on that you know that the Iran
Israeli hostility came to the front line
became a direct confrontation of a
direct Irani talk on Israel and the
feeling was I guess that this has sent a
message to Israel of deterrence you know
and what Israel is doing now very
clearly is saying we are not deterred
you know we don't care if you in tan or
anywhere else in Iran we don't care
about that we will get you because you
are on our Target list and um and
therefore we're not also afraid of
Iranian response this is what Israelis
are trying to say basically what are the
internal political Dynamics within
Israel that have made this possible I
understand there's going to be a
security cabinet meeting coming up later
today correct yeah netan uh he's now
basically a oneman show I mean he has
the defense minister Galant who is also
very much of a of a hawk he's very much
you know he's a hardliner he very much
pushes for more and more confrontation
but then um the moderate forces who were
were in his cabinet has are no longer
there for a couple of weeks this is
Ganson his supporter aen Cott so netan
is actually on the one hand far more uh
at the um at the mercy of the extreme
right in his government because he needs
them in order to maintain his power but
then also at the same times he has very
less very fewer people who might stop
him from taking steps like this that
could escalate into a bigger War you
know uh directly with Iran and also you
know one of the reasons we're talking
about Iran and Israel it's because what
Israel has been saying for years that
the proxies of Iran that are surrounding
Israel this sort of Ring of Fire um that
is very much active we see it in the
South with hudis and Yemen where Israel
was operating 10 days ago we see it in
the northern border um and of course
this the still ongoing fight in Gaza all
the time we're talking tomorrow is going
to be 300 days of fighting in Gaza but
do you think without this influence of
the extreme right on Netanyahu that
Israel would have gone ahead with a
strike with a with what Hamas is saying
is an assination on its leader um in in
other circumstances well Israel said
very clearly from the beginning any
leaders of Hamas anybody associated with
Hamas for us is as a legitimate Target
it also has American support in that
aspect when it comes tobala and Hamas
you know seen both by also the Americans
at A T organization is also
understanding Israel's need to to fight
um and defend itself as it would say
even people like C Harris where is
considered to be a bit more hostile are
behind this this line of action of
Israel so
in a way this is nothing new but then
the more Iran is drawn into this you
know directly into this conflict which
is what we're seeing might probably will
happen the higher the stakes are and you
know the easier you know the chance for
an all escalation this is also why we're
seeing responsive from China through
Russia of course everybody in the region
Kar Jordan Lebanon everybody is
concerned everybody wants to put the
Flames down but there's seems to be very
little um attentiveness or willingness
for Coop you know diplomatic efforts
right now now on either of the sides
especially in Israel yeah the
implications are truly Global thank you
so much for joining us with that
analysis that is DW's Middle East
analyst shanie
rosanes so if you're just joining us
let's bring you up to speed here the
Palestinian militant group Hamas says
its political leader isma hania has been
assassinated in tan here is what we can
say for sure so far in a statement Hamas
says hania was killed while on a visit
to Iran's Capital tan to attend the
inaugural ation of President mud pesan
Iran's revolutionary guard has also
confirmed his death now no one has
claimed responsibility for the
assassination but the suspicion has
fallen on Israel which has vowed to kill
hania and other leaders of Hamas Israel
has not yet responded to the allegations
a Hamas official says the group will
respond to hania's death the official
calling it a quote cowardly act that
will not go
unpunished and of course uh worth
mentioning hania's death this comes
after Israel said it had killed a top
Hezbollah commander in an air strike on
a suburb of Beirut Israel blamed the
group for an attack that killed 12
children and teenagers in the Israeli
occupied Golan Heights on Saturday an
attack which Hezbollah denies
involvement
in and we can get more now from
journalist Kareem Al goari joining us
from Beirut glad to have you back kareim
can you tell us what you have heard what
kind of reaction uh you've gathered
there to to these two uh
killings well it's basically here in
Beirut everyone who is close to the
Palestinian CA and that is a lot of
people in Lebanon uh they are angry they
are angry because this they say this was
even if they're not Hamas supporters
they say this was an extra Judiciary
killing of one of the Pol Palestinian
political leaders so but of course we
have especially anger in within the
ranks of hisbah and also within the
Palestinian camps here in Lebanon and on
the other hand if you ask the other
Lebanese there is a big worry what's
going to happen now how this situation
is escalating and how Lebanon might be
might get involved in this Kim stay with
us for just a moment we've talked about
how this attack comes hours after
another major development in the region
with Israel saying it's killed a top
Hezbollah commander in an air strike on
a beout suburb I'd like to take a closer
look at this Hezbollah the pro-iran
militia in Lebanon has confirmed that
the commander was in the building at the
time but they have not confirmed his
fate it was a question of when not if
Israel would retaliate after a
projectile hit a soccer field in majal
Shams in the Golan Heights and killed 12
children and
teenagers Israel blamed Hezbollah and
warned the militant group who would pay
a heavy
price Israel's response was a rare air
strike on the outskirts of Beirut
lebanon's Health Ministry said the
attack killed at least one woman and two
children and wounded
[Applause]
dozens the Israeli military says the
strike was targeted and killed a top
Hezbollah Commander fuad shukur
Fu chukur was the rightand man to kasan
asala kis bala's leader and his advisor
in planning and directing attacks and
operations the United States says shukur
orchestrated the 1983 bombing of the US
Marine Barracks in Beirut which killed
241 US military personnel and had put a
bounty of $5 million on his
head he's been one of the group's
leading military figures since it was
established by Iran's revolutionary
guards more than four decades
ago after the Israel Hamas war broke out
on October 7 Shakur was accused by
Israel of being behind many of the Drone
and missile attacks that Hezbollah
carried out against
Israel if Israel's claim proves true
Shakur will be the most senior Hezbollah
Commander to be killed since 2016 when
Mustafa baddin the group's military
commander in Syria died in an explosion
in Damascus
the strik has threatened to escalate
hostilities between Israel and Hezbollah
at a time when tensions are already
running
hot the UN is urging cam fearful that
the region could be on the brink of a
wider
War let's get back across to kareim El
goari in Beirut so if it turns out to
prove true that Israel has in fact uh
killed Shakur what kind of response
would you expect from Hezbollah
yeah they they made clear that for sure
in any case there will be a response the
question is how the response will look
like um normally you have kind of this
Unwritten uh rules of engagements
between isbah and Israeli Army a
military Target for a military Target so
in a way you could of course consider
for sh a military Target as he was one
of the big military commanders uh of
hisbah and you could have maybe expected
that the answer of hisbah then is
another military Target deeper inside
Israel because that strike was of course
not at the border but in the in the
Lebanese Capital but of course now with
the killing of isma Han in in ton that
is that equation is has to be done
completely new hisbah sees themselves as
a part of the excess of resistance
against Israel and with that it's of
course close to Hamas that might
influence now how um how hisbah is
reacting if we learn anything about this
we can see how everything is really
interconnected here in this region and
what kind of potential all this has for
now a wider escalation do you think
hania's death will now mean that we
could see a stronger response from
Hezbollah than we would have if it had
just been uh this strike in
Beirut yeah that's exactly what I'm
saying I mean they have to put a new
equation they will have to do something
bigger than they originally said but we
don't know when this is going to happen
normally this can take days this can
take weeks till they answer that hisbah
is normally sinking way strategically
and might it might take a while till we
see a reation I'd like to turn now uh to
talking about indirect negotiations that
have been going on between Hamas and
Israel for a ceasefire and for a return
of the hostages um these were often
taking place in Qatar uh we know that is
um that is very much where we saw him
him based for a lot of the time where
Han was living now that he is out of the
picture do you think these talks are
effectively at a
standstill I think we can expect that at
least the short run Hamas will withdraw
from these negotiations we can expect a
harder line uh from u h from Hamas on
the other side it might be open new
pathes because if you look at Benyamin
Netanyahu he was desperate to get some
kind of success some kind of success he
didn't get yet with all this military
campaign in Gaza big parts of the Gaza
Strip is is is destroyed but the
declared goal of destroying Hamas is
didn't of course happen now he can sell
the killing of the political leader of
Hamas of course as a success that might
give him a way into to ending the
military operation in the Gaza Strip the
problem here is that he needs partially
Hamas to do that because in order to do
that he needs to get some kind of deal
about the release of Hostage and that at
least in the short run is right not very
physic right now so you're saying that
there needs to also be a deal done in
order for there to be an offramp for
Netanyahu to try and end the war it's
not enough just to say look we've got
the leader of Hamas and that's it now
yeah at least if you want to the release
of the hostages as part of the deal who
are with Hamas of course you need a deal
with Hamas and that's exactly the
problem right now well thank you so much
uh for your insights today that is a
journalist Kareem Al goari in Beirut we
very much appreciate your time as
always thank you very
much well Iran has now responded to the
death of Han in a statement carried on
Iranian State media president mud pesan
said that Iran will quote defend its
territorial Integrity dignity honor and
pride and will make the terrorist
occupiers regret their cowardly
act reactions have also been coming in
from other countries including from the
United States speaking during a visit to
the Philippines defense secretary Lloyd
Austin said the US had no additional
information on the assassination of hi
Austin also insisted the US was trying
to cool tensions in the region and that
was always room for diplomacy while also
reaffirming support for Israel's
defense and we can get more now from
journalist Kareem Al goari joining us
from Beirut glad to have you back Kareem
Can you tell us what you have heard what
kind of reaction uh you've gathered
there to to these two uh
killings well it's basically here in
Beirut everyone who is close to the
Palestinian cause and that is a lot of
people in Lebanon uh they are angry they
are angry because this they say this was
even if they're not Hamas supporters
they say this was an extra Judiciary
killing of one of the PO Palestinian
political leaders so but of course you
have especially anger in within the
ranks of hisbah and also within the
Palestinian camps here in Lebanon and on
the other hand if you ask the other
Lebanese there is a big worry what's
going to happen now how this situation
is escalating in how Lebanon might be
might get involved in this now Kareem
stay with us for just a moment we've
talked about how this attack comes hours
after another major development in the
region with Israel saying it's killed a
top Hezbollah commander in an air strike
on a bayout suburb I'd like to take a
closer look at this Hezbollah the
pro-iran militia in Lebanon has
confirmed that uh the commander was in
the building at the time but they have
not confirmed his
fate it was a question of when not if
Israel would retaliate after a
projectile hit a soccer field in majal
Shams in the Golan Heights and killed 12
children and
teenagers Israel blamed Hezbollah and
warned the militant group who would pay
a heavy
price Israel's response was a rare air
strike on the outskirts of Beirut
lebanon's Health Ministry said the
attack killed at least one woman and two
children and wounded
[Applause]
dozens the Israeli military says the
strike was targeted and killed a top
Hezbollah Commander fuad
shukur Fu chukur was the right-and man
to kasan asala bala's leader and his
advisor in planning and directing
attacks and and
operations the United States says Shakur
orchestrated the 1983 bombing of the US
Marine Barracks in Beirut which killed
241 US military personnel and it put a
bounty of $5 million on his
head he's been one of the group's
leading military figures since it was
established by Iran's revolutionary
guards more than four decades
ago after the Israel Hamas war broke out
on October 7 Shakur was accused by
Israel of being behind men of the Drone
and missile attacks that Hezbollah
carried out against
Israel if Israel's claim proves true
Shakur will be the most senior Hezbollah
Commander to be killed since 2016 when
Mustafa baddin the group's military
commander in Syria died in an explosion
in
Damascus the strikers threatened to
escalate hostilities between Israel and
Hezbollah at a time when tensions are
already running
hot the UN is urging Cal fearful that
the region could would be on the brink
of a wider
War let's get back across to kareim Al
goari in Beirut so if it turns out to
prove true that Israel has in fact uh
killed shukur what kind of response
would you expect from
Hezbollah yeah they they made clear that
for sure in any case there will be a
response the question is how the
response will look like um normally you
have kind of this Unwritten
uh rules of engagements between isbah
and Israeli Army a military Target for a
military Target so in a way you could of
course consider for sh a military Target
as he was one of the big military
commanders U of hisbah and you could
have maybe expected that the answer of
hisbah then is another military Target
deeper inside Israel because that strike
was of course not at the border but uh
in the in the Lebanese Capital but of
course now with the killing of is in
inan that is that equation is has to be
done completely new hisbah sees
themselves as a part of the excess of
resistance against Israel and with that
is of course close to Hamas and that
might influence now how um how hisbah is
reacting if we learn anything about this
we can see how everything is really
interconnected here in this region and
what kind of potential all this has for
now a wider escalation do you think
hania's death will now mean that we
could see a stronger response from
Hezbollah than we would have if it had
just been uh this strike in
Beirut yeah that's exactly what I'm
saying I mean they have to put a new
equation they will have to do something
bigger than they originally said but we
don't know when this is going to happen
normally this can take days this can
take weeks till the answer that hisbah
is normally thinking way strategically
and might it might take a while till we
see a reaction I'd like to turn now uh
to talking about indirect negotiations
that have been going on between Hamas
and Israel for a ceasefire and for a
return of the hostages um these were
often taking place in Qatar uh we know
that is um that is very much where we
saw him him based for a lot of the time
where Hye was living now that he is out
of the picture do you think these talks
are effectively he stand
still I think we can expect that at
least the short run Hamas will withdraw
from these negotiations we can expect a
harder line uh from H from Hamas on the
other side it might be open New Paths
because if you look at Benyamin
Netanyahu um he was desperate to get
some kind of success some kind of
success he didn't get yet with all this
military campaign in Gaza big parts of
the Gaza Strip is is is destroyed but
the declared goal of destroying Hamas is
didn't of course happen now he can sell
the killing of the political leader of
Hamas of course as a success that might
give him a way into ending the military
operation in the Gaza Strip the problem
here is that he needs partially Hamas to
do that because in order to do that he
needs to get some kind of deal about the
release of Hostage and death at least in
the short run is right not very visible
right now so you're saying that there
needs to also be a deal done in order
for there to be an offramp for Netanyahu
to try and end the war it's not enough
just to say look we've got the leader of
Hamas and that's it
now yeah at least if you want to the
release of the hostages as part of the
deal who
are with Hamas of course you need to
deal with Hamas and that's exactly the
problem right now well thank you so much
uh for your insights today that is a
journalist Kareem El goari in bayut we
very much appreciate your time as
always and some for some more analysis
here I would like to bring in Simon
mabon professor of international
politics at Lancaster university in the
United Kingdom good morning thank you so
much uh for taking the time to join us
um I'd like to just start by asking you
what you expect we could potentially see
as a response uh from Hamas and from
tan it's the million dooll question I
guess my my instinct says that we'll see
some pretty robust rhetoric from from a
number of different actors across the
middle east from Hamas from tan from
hisbah and probably also from the
houthis and perhaps also the Iraqi
militias that are are supported by and
have a close relationship with this
quote unquote resistance axis I imagine
there will be uh articulations of a firm
and robust response that this will not
go quote unquote unpunished and that
there will be a strong response to this
attack but then the the question then
comes what does that response actually
look like will there be a a a response
that plays into this escalatory game
that that many are fearing will happen
and and I'm not convinced that we will
see this dramatic escalation but it's
not the sort of thing that can just be
left without a response um we know that
when the when the Israelis struck
Iranian territory earlier this year
there was a symbolic strike against
Israel conducted by Iran but that was
was done in such a way that prevented a
wider escalation whilst also Saving Face
so it's a very very difficult balance
here and it is certainly a precarious
and disconcerting moment indeed the
concern for months has been that
escalating attacks could spiral into a
major war in the Middle East a much
wider conflict in your view is it in
anyone's interest here to see things
escalate or are there interests in place
that give you hope uh that that cooler
heads will
prevail very few people would benefit
from a war very few States would benefit
the devastation of conflict as we're
seeing in Gaza is catastrophic we know
that people people across the region in
Israel in Gaza in Lebanon in Iran are
the ones that are paying the most
devastating price of any conflict that
would take place so I would urge
everyone to do whatever is possible to
avoid conflict to avoid escalation and
I'm confident that that people would see
that that that leaders do not want an
escalation now the problem is just
because states do not want an escal it
doesn't mean that that doesn't happen
because of the complexities of the
situation the sensitivities of it the
perceived fears the perceived anger and
worry about what the other is doing and
this is this is the sort of thing that
we've seen time and time again
throughout history with States not
necessarily wanting to go to war but
finding themselves on a very slippery
slope into Conflict by virtue of of
circumstance rather than aspiration or
desire a very ious moment in history
here indeed um I'd like to to zoom in on
the war in Gaza and ask you what you
think the killing of hania could mean
for Hamas for its operations and also
for the course of the war going
forward well for the course of the war
it means very little because he was
operating at a distance he was between
gatar and turkey and obviously Iran now
so on a day-to-day basis he wasn't n
directly involved he wasn't involved in
strategy he wasn't involved in planning
he wasn't involved in the in the actions
of those on the ground and and that had
in some respects reduced his perceived
legitimacy amongst the groups so in
terms of the day-to-day it doesn't mean
all that much but it's more about the
symbolic dimensions of this the symbolic
sense that a a senior political leader
has been killed and that will undeniably
prompt to respond resp the question is
what type of response can Hamas and of
enact given that they are already under
the the boot of the IDF they are
suffering they are struggling to to to
survive in essence and the the people of
Gaza are also in a devastating condition
so whilst there may be a desire to
respond to this and to take action the
the practicalities the reality of it is
is that there's very little that Hamas
can do on its own indeed well thank you
so much for taking the time to share
your expertise with us that is Iran and
Middle East expert Simon maon